Open Access Policy within the Max Weber
Foundation
Adopted by the Board of Trustees on November 22, 2024

Preamble

The Max Weber Foundation – German Humanities Institutes Abroad (Max Weber Stiftung –
Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland (MWS)) is a publicly funded organization
that aims to inform both the scientific community and the general public about its research
activities and results, and to make these freely available. The MWS advocates for Open Science in
which all components of the research process are as accessible, transparent, and reusable as
possible, in order to promote research, innovation, and transfer in science, in the economy, and in
the public interest. The foundation understands Open Access (OA) as the open provision of and free
access to peer-reviewed, high-quality publications under standardized open licenses as a central
component of Open Science and as part of good scientific practice.

Relationship to other documents and existing practices of
the MWS
The current Open Access Policy is based on the MWS’s agreements with the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) as well as the MWS’s sustainability and “Strategy 2030” concept
papers. 1 It is aligned with the Open Access Strategy of the BMBF 2 and concretizes the Open Science
Policy of the Max Weber Foundation 3 with respect to publication processes.

1 Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2023). Nachhaltigkeitskonzept der Max

Weber Stiftung. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10220844; the MWS strategy until 2030:
https://www.maxweberstiftung.de/fileadmin/user_upload/MWS_Strategie2030.pdf (both documents are only available
in German).
2 Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (2018): Open Access in Deutschland. Die Strategie des
Bundesministeriums für Bildung und Forschung.
https://www.bmbf.de/SharedDocs/Publikationen/de/bmbf/1/24102_Open_Access_in_Deutschland.pdf?__blob=publicati
onFile&v=5.
3 Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2024). Open Science Policy within the
Max Weber Foundation. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14283651.

The MWS has signed the Berlin Declaration (2003) on “Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences
and Humanities” 4 and the “Action Plan for Diamond Open Access” 5 (2022). The MWS follows the
recommendations of the German Science Council on transitioning scientific publishing to an Open
Access framework. 6 Furthermore, the MWS has taken part in building and actively participates in
national and European research infrastructure consortia with a special focus on Open Access
publications (OPERAS, GKFI e.V.). In addition, it has operated its own Open Access publication
platform, perspectivia.net, since 2008. 7 Many volumes and journals of the institutes of the Max
Weber Foundation are already published in Open Access. The foundation aims to transform all
publications of its institutes into Open Access.

Commitment to Open Access principles

The Max Weber Foundation and its institutes are committed to the principles of Open Access and
include their employees in this responsibility. The foundation supports its employees in scientific
publishing in Open Access. Publications should be made available under a free license (e.g. CC BY
4.0) as soon as possible, considering specific disciplinary considerations and relevant quality
criteria, regardless of the publication venue. This includes hybrid publication forms that combine
freely-accessible online offers with cost-based print offers.

The MWS supports researchers in implementing Open Access through consultancy services,
financial subventions, and by providing the necessary infrastructure:
•

•
•

Consultancy services: The institutes of the MWS appoint contact persons who consult
researchers in cooperation with the Digital Library of the MWS 8 regarding the selection of
suitable formats for Open Access publications, taking into account the funding possibilities
and Open Access infrastructure of the MWS, as well as possibilities for secondary
publication.
Further education: The MWS regularly offers further education to its researchers on
individual publication strategies and increasing the visibility of their own publications.
Infrastructure: The MWS provides the digital publication platform perspectivia.net as a
Diamond Open Access model. Taking into consideration binding quality criteria, 9 research
results in the form of both primary (Diamond OA model 10) and secondary publications
(Green OA 11) are shared on the platform and made freely accessible in the long term.
Through the cooperation of perspectivia.net, institute libraries, and the Digital Library of
the MWS with library networks, subject information services, and publishers, the optimal
findability of Open Access publications in catalogs and databases is ensured. This

4 See: https://openaccess.mpg.de/Berlin-Declaration.

5 Ancion, Zoé, Borrell-Damián, Lidia, Mounier, Pierre, Rooryck, Johan, & Saenen, Bregt. (2022): Action Plan for Diamond

Open Access. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6282403.
6 Wissenschaftsrat (2022): Empfehlungen zur Transformation des wissenschaftlichen Publizierens zu Open Access.
https://www.wissenschaftsrat.de/download/2022/9477-22.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=24.
7 See: https://perspectivia.net/.
8 Contact: open-access@maxweberstiftung.de
9 The quality criteria are defined and overseen by the scientific advisory board of perspectivia.net and follow the
recommendations of EQSIP: Rico-Castro, P., Rooryck, J., Melinščak Zlodi, I., Stojanovski, J., Ševkušić, M., & Armengou, C.
(2024). D3.2 Extensible Quality Standard in Institutional Publishing (EQSIP) V2.0 for Diamond Open Access (1.0).
Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10726732.
10 See glossary.
11 See glossary.

2

•

•

•

contributes to the international visibility of research results from the MWS’s institutes and
to better networking of researchers.
Secondary publication rights: When publications appear in subscription-based journals
and immediate Open Access is not possible, researchers of the MWS may exercise their right
to secondary publication in accordance with §38 Abs. 1 (UrhG) in an Open Access
repository of their choice. Researchers should also exhaust all possibilities of Open Access
publication for monographs and collections.
Open Access Fund: The MWS takes into account the fact that Open Access publications may
be associated with costs depending on the publisher and funding model. Therefore, the
MWS financially supports Open Access not only through the operation of its own OA
publication platform (perspectivia.net), but also aims to establish a publication fund that
offers MWS members additional options for publishing in Open Access. The fund will
support publications on OA platforms, in OA journals, or OA repositories that meet the
internationally recognized and supported criteria of Plan S. 12 The explicit and transparent
costs for services such as layout, editing, peer review, and quality assurance, which are
invoiced by the mentioned platforms, journals, or repositories according to their business
model, are could be part of the funding. 13
Monitoring: The MWS will explicitly recognize and highlight Open Access publications in
its annual monitoring report to demonstrate their value and importance. Furthermore, the
MWS asks its employees to reflect on their voluntary contributions to the processes of
reviewing, editing, and copy-editing research publications and encourages them to
prioritize participating in processes which will produce Open Access publication. The
engagement of non-commercial Open Access offers will be particularly encouraged,
evaluated, and honored.

Scope of application

The Open Access Policy applies to the entire foundation and all researchers of the MWS. The
institutes may establish their own regulations for the free access to publications of their
researchers which were created before the beginning of their contract or are published after their
contract ends.

Validity

The current guidelines were adopted by the Board of Trustees of the MWS on 22.11.2024 in Berlin.
They will be reviewed and, if necessary, updated at least every four years with regard to new
developments in the fields of Open Access and Open Science.

12 Plan S is the implementation of and the transformation process in Diamond Open Access: https://www.coalition-

s.org/plan_s_principles/.
13 Johan Rooryck. 2023. „Principles of Diamond Open Access Publishing: A Draft Proposal“. Billet. The Diamond Papers
(blog). 2. Mai 2023. https://thd.hypotheses.org/35.

3

Current version of the guidelines
Version

1.0

Publication

Kommentar/Änderungen

28.01.2025

First publication, adopted by the Board of Trustees on
November 22, 2024.
Translation of the original text was done with the help
of AI (https://docs.hpc.gwdg.de/services/chatai/models/index.html#llama-31-8b-instruct) plus
human manual correction and editing.

License
The current policy is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY
4.0) license.

Citation

Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2024). Open Access
Policy within the Max Weber Foundation. Zenodo. https://doi.org/ 10.5281/zenodo.14282081.

Glossary

Diamond Open Access
Diamond Open Access means that there are no fees to either authors or readers. The financing is
done through institutional or higher-level funding. This definition refers to the Action Plan for
Diamond Open Access. 14

Embargo period

An embargo period is a time delay after which publishers allow authors to make the full texts of
their publications available to the public in a repository. 15

Free license

A free license allows the use, dissemination, and modification of copyrighted works. This is the case,
for example, with Creative Commons licenses: CC BY 4.0 or CC BY-SA 4.0. The latter allows the
reuse and re-publication only under the same license conditions as the original (share alike).

Green OA

Green Open Access - also known as self-archiving – refers to making works published with a
publisher or in a journal available to the public in a repository. It is sometimes understood to refer
also to making such works available on the author’s personal website. Self-archiving can take place
at the same time as the publication of the content by the publisher or at a later date, and is possible
14 Ancion, Z., Borrell-Damián, L., Mounier, P., Rooryck, J., & Saenen, B. (2022). Action Plan for Diamond Open Access.

Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6282403.
15 See: https://open-access.network/en/information/glossary#c6285.

4

for preprints and post-prints of scholarly articles, as well as for other document types, for example,
monographs, research reports, and conference proceedings. 16

Open Access

In the Budapest Open Access Initiative, Open Access is defined as follows: Open Access means that
“[...] literature, [is] free availability on the public internet, permitting any users to read, download,
copy, distribute, print, search, or link to the full texts of these articles, crawl them for indexing, pass
them as data to software, or use them for any other lawful purpose, without financial, legal, or
technical barriers other than those inseparable from gaining access to the internet itself. The only
constraint on reproduction and distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, should
be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly
acknowledged and cited.” 17

Open-Access-Repository

An Open-Access-repository is operated by universities or research institutions that publish and
make scientific materials available worldwide and in the long term. Institutional OA repositories
(operated by institutions such as university libraries, other infrastructure institutions, or research
organizations, e.g. perspectivia.net) and disciplinary OA repositories (institutions-transcending,
thematically bundled, e.g. for a subject area, FID repositories) as well as generic OA repositories
(e.g. Zenodo) are distinguished.

Transformation

In the context of open access, the term transformation refers to the complete conversion of the
scholarly publication system to open access, inter alia by converting traditional subscription
journals into open access journals. 18

Secondary publication right

The secondary publication right is a limitation under German copyright law that gives the author of
a contribution to a periodically published collection the right to make the contribution available to
the public online for self-archiving in a repository after an embargo period of 12 months, even if the
publisher has already been granted an exclusive right of use. The prerequisite is that the
contribution was produced in the context of publicly funded research. The secondary publication
right refers to the accepted manuscript version of the contribution (i.e. the author's final version of
the work, as accepted for publication following peer review but without the publisher's layout). 19
Many publishers allow also secondary publication of articles in collection volumes and possibly also
allow to reuse the publisher's layout after a period of at least 12 months. In all secondary
publications, a clear reference to the primary publication should be made both in the document and
in the metadata. It is also recommended to inquire with the publisher about the license under
which publication is allowed to be published in the repository. If possible use a Creative Commons
licence in the secondary publication. Internationally, the applicable law must be observed in
accordance with the publication location.

16 See: https://open-access.network/en/information/glossary#c6221.
17 See: https://www.budapestopenaccessinitiative.org/read/.

18 See: https://open-access.network/en/information/glossary#c6325.
19 See; https://open-access.network/en/information/glossary#c6330.

5

