Max Planck Open Access Policy
Definition of Open Access
In the scientific field, the term "open access" refers to unrestricted and free access to scientific
information on the Internet. Accordingly, users should have the right not only to read a
publication, but also to pass it on to a wider audience and use it for teaching purposes, for
example. Of course, the original author must always be credited. A more precise definition of
open access can be found in the Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the
Sciences and Humanities.
Publication on the Internet without expressly transferring rights to the users in the meaning
mentioned above does not meet the requirements of Open Access. Concerns that Open Access
contravenes the rules of good scientific practice are unfounded, given that the same rules
apply here as apply to conventional publications (ban on plagiarism, improper adaptation,
etc.).
The call for OA has also been motivated by the trend in the cost of scholarly journals, which
has led to the so-called journal crisis. Many proponents of OA hope that it will not only
improve accessibility but also serve to keep costs down.

The Max Planck Society and Open Access
The Max Planck Society, funded by the federal and state governments, conducts basic
research in the public interest. Making its scientists’ research findings available for the benefit
of the whole of humanity, free of charge whenever possible (Open Access), is a key aspiration
of the Society.
This is the spirit out of which the first Berlin Conference was initiated in 2003, along with the
Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities that was
adopted there. It strengthened the Open Access Movement in Germany and across the globe
in a sustained manner. Together with the Budapest Open Access Initiative (February 2002)
and the Bethesda Statement on Open Access Publishing (June 2003), it is seen as a
fundamental element of the programme pursued by the international Open Access Movement.
The Max Planck Society provides one of the most important forums for professional
discussion of the international development of Open Access in the Berlin Open Access
Conference, which it stages with different partner organisations every year.
Overall, the Max Planck Society’s Open Access policy forms part of a close collaboration
within the Alliance of German Scientific Organisations.
Internally, the Max Planck Society calls upon its academic staff to observe the principle of
public availability of basic research in its Rules of Good Scientific Practice. Its Rules for
Scientific Advisory Boards were correspondingly extended to include a section on Open
Access.
The concept of Open Access is realised in practice through centralised strategic decisions,
such as the creation of a central budget for subscription and Open Access publication charges,
and a large number of corresponding projects. For instance, the Max Planck Society is
involved in projects that promote the reconfiguration of science publishing to enable Open
Access, e.g. by developing and analysing Open Access business models.

The decision to establish the Max Planck Digital Library was a crucial one. The library is
responsible for supplying the Max Planck institutes with their basic information requirements.
As such, it also operates the two central repositories of the Max Planck Society, eDoc and
PubMan. The Max Planck Society’s Open Access Policy Team (in German only) is also based
at the Max Planck Digital Library, acting as a point of contact for all Max Planck Society
scientists and librarians on Open Access matters.
Information on the Max Planck Society’s individual Open Access projects and activities can
be found on the page detailing open access activities at the MPS.

