TU Berlin's Open Access Policy
Passed unanimously by the Academic Senate on December
6, 2017
In its Mission Statement, the Technische Universität Berlin commits to research and teaching
that is based on social, ethical and humanist grounds. It is against this background that
research and teaching in the natural, planning and engineering sciences are inextricably linked
with the humanities and social sciences. It is particularly important to TU Berlin that research
findings are sustainably disseminated, accessible and visible.
In order to achieve this, TU Berlin supports the research political request for Open Access to
scholarly knowledge as laid out in the “Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in
the Sciences and Humanities”.
TU Berlin's Executive Board and Academic Senate strongly recommend that the university's
members publish their research results Open Access. In keeping with the Berlin Declaration,
the following guidelines have been adopted:
1. TU Berlin recommends that members of the university publish their work Open
Access and under a free license (preferably a Creative Commons license CC BY). It is
supporting Open Access in a number of ways, including setting up a publication fund
to cover Open Access fees.
2. TU Berlin is calling on members of the university to exercise their secondary
exploitation right and to self-archive all publications in repositories, either at the same
time as the publication or after a set period of time. The TU Berlin repository can be
used for this.
3. TU Berlin encourages all university members to transfer non-exclusive rights of use
when signing a copyright transfer agreement. If this is not possible, it is recommended
to reserve the right to self-archive the publication in the TU Berlin repository.
4. TU Berlin asks all university members to reevaluate their role as reviewers, editors
and in other publishing processes with regard to the respective Open Access policy, to
use their position to influence publishers and learned societies and to preferentially
favour Open Access publications with their voluntary work where possible. Noncommercial publishing options are particularly encouraged.
5. TU Berlin supports Open Access to research data.The management of research data is
governed by the “Guidelines on Research Data Management at TU Berlin”.
6. Members of TU Berlin can publish their work Open Access in the TU Berlin
University Press. This applies to monographs, anthologies and Open Access journals.
7. TU Berlin's own publications should appear under the terms of free licenses
(preferably the Creative Commons license CC BY).
8. The university has appointed an Open Access Representative to implement the Open
Access Policy. The University Library is responsible for coordinating Open Access
activities and developing Services.

Contact
Open Access Team University Library
openaccess@ub.tu-berlin.de

Website Open Access Team University Library

Glossary accompanying TU Berlin's Open Access Policy
Berlin Declaration
The 2003 Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities
is one of the foundation stones of the international Open Access movement. It calls for Open
Access to scholarly information. This includes written publications as well as research data,
images and multimedia objects. TU Berlin signed the declaration in August 2016.

CC BY
CC BY is an open license distributed by the non-profit organization Creative Commons. The
license permits every person to copy, distribute and adapt a work, provided that the creator is
appropriately credited and that modifications are indicated. With this license, works can be
published Open Access in line with the principles of the Berlin Declaration.

Closed Access
Closed Access means that a work can only be accessed on payment of a fee. In academia
these fees have traditionally been paid by libraries, for example by signing license
agreements. Closed Access means that all rights of use are transferred to the publisher. Not
even authors can re-use their works without obtaining the publisher’s permission. Selfarchiving options are thus limited.

Creative Commons Licenses
Creative Commons licenses (CC licenses) are open licenses developed by the non-profit
organization Creative Commons. There are six CC licenses available, providing authors with
various options depending on the extent to which they want to give the general public the
right to make use of their work. All CC licenses require attribution, meaning that for each use
authors must be credited appropriately.

First Publication
A work is usually published by a publishing house (first publication), e.g in the form of a
monograph, an article in an anthology or in a journal. If works are published closed access,
they may under certain conditions be self-archived to ensure Open Access.

Open License

A open license is a standardized license agreement. With an open license creators can grant
the public certain rights of use that go beyond those provided by copyright law. For software
open licenses such as the BSD license, the GNU General Public License (GPL) and the
Apache license are well established. For texts, images, music and videos Creative Commons
licenses are the most common.

Rights of Use
Rights of use determine how copyrighted works can be used by authors, publishers and third
parties. Authors transfer either non-exclusive or exclusive rights of use. A non-exclusive right
of use entitles you to use the work in accordance with the license agreement. An exclusive
right of use, on the other hand, entitles only the rightsholder(s) to use the work. No other
parties are permitted to use the work. For example, for authors who have granted others
exclusive rights of use in a Copyright Transfer Agreement self-archiving options are limited.

Open Access
Open Access means that works can be archived reliably, accessed freely and used legally.
Examples of re-use include storage, digital teaching, publication on social media platforms
and text and data mining. The term applies to publicly funded scholarly publications, research
data and digital cultural heritage.

Open Access Representative
The Open Access Representative advises the TU Executive Board on strategic decisions
related to Open Access. She works closely with the University Library’s Open Access team,
which is responsible for implementation.

Article Processing Charges
Article Processing Charges (APCs, also known as publication fees) are charges made by
publishers before publishing an author’s article. They are usually paid by the institution on
behalf of the author. TU Berlin has set up an Open Access Publication Fund, which covers
APCs under certain conditions.

Open Access Policy
The TU Berlin Open Access Policy includes recommendations for TU members to publish
Open Access and commitments by the university to provide corresponding services in terms
of advice, financing and infrastructure.

Open Access Publication Fund
An Open Access Publication Fund is an entity set up by an scholarly institution to cover
article processing charges. Members of the institution are entitled to apply for funds. TU
Berlin has established a publication fund which is managed by the University Library.

Repository

A repository is a platform for publishing and archiving scholarly publications, research data
and cultural heritage data. DepositOnce is TU Berlin’s repository for publications and
research data. Other well-known repositories include arXiv and EconStore.

TU Berlin University Press
The TU Berlin University Press is the university’s own publishing entity and is run by the
University Library. As an Open Access publisher, it supports and promotes unrestricted
access to scholarly works. The University Press publishes monographs and anthologies online
and, if required, in print.

Copyright Transfer Agreement
A Copyright Transfer Agreement (CTA) determines the rights and obligations of authors
and publishers. Agreements on the transfer of rights of use are a key component. In a CTA
with closed access conditions, authors grant the publisher exclusive rights of use. After
signing such a CTA they can no longer make use of their work without obtaining the
publisher's permission. Under Open Access conditions, however, authors transfer nonexclusive rights of use to the publisher. Authors thus retain the right to self-archive.

Self-Archiving
Through self-archiving works that were published under closed access conditions can be
made Open Access. Works are self-archived in a repository, either on the same day as the
publication or after a set period of time (embargo). Uploading work on personal websites or
similar does not count as self-archiving, as it does not guarantee important features such as
long-term accessibility and citability.

Secondary Exploitation Right
The Secondary Exploitation Right outlined in section 38, paragraph 4 of the German
Copyright Law governs self-archiving. Under certain conditions authors may make their
works publicly available and thus ensure Open Access. This right applies even if selfarchiving is not permitted in the copyright transfer agreement.
Open Access Team University Library
openaccess@ub.tu-berlin.de

Website Open Access Team University Library

