Open Access Policy of TU Darmstadt 1
Technical University of Darmstadt (TU Darmstadt) is committed to the
principles of freedom of research and teaching as well as to the principles
of open science. TU Darmstadt advocates open research and teaching as
well as sharing the research results of its scientists with society at large.
While taking into account specific characteristics of various fields of
research and relevant quality criteria, all publications and research data
meant for publication including research results originating from TU
Darmstadt shall, therefore, be made accessible and reusable under an open
licence and preferably without restrictions.
To emphasise this objective, TU Darmstadt has signed the “Berlin
Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and
Humanities” 2 and supports initiatives that implement and/or promote this
Berlin Declaration. As an important factor in successful and innovative
teaching and research, the Executive Board and the Senate of TU
Darmstadt maintain that its affiliates should be able to publish their
research results freely and in open access formats and have free and
unrestricted access to the results of their research.
Specifically, they promote that
1. Primary publication takes place under a free licence, preferably a
Creative Commons Licence (CC BY);
2. Affiliates of TU Darmstadt make use of their legal right to
secondary publishing and that all publications are made available
via repositories (TUprints in particular) either at the same time or
deferred;
3. When entering a contract with a publishing house, only simple,
non-exclusive licences are granted;
4. The open access fees are limited to the rates stated by the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG: German Research
Foundation);

1 Translation of the official German text “Open-Access-Policy der TU Darmstadt”

from 29th August 2019.
2 https://openaccess.mpg.de/Berliner-Erklaerung

Seite

1/2

5. Research data intended for publication or supporting such
publications are published under free licences and open standards
whenever possible; refer to “Guidelines on Digital Research Data at
TU Darmstadt” 3;
6. Affiliates of TU Darmstadt are more involved than before in the
reviewing, editing and publishing of open access publications;
7. Procedures for quality assurance and measuring scholarly
impact are used or established which are based on open access
publishing and which promote the role of open access in gaining
scientific reputation;
8. Digital teaching materials (such as recordings etc.) are made
available via repositories (such as OpenLearnWare) after careful
examination in compliance with Open Educational Resources
(OER) under a Creative Commons Licence.

The Executive Board will promote open access intensively, set up an
incentive system for open access publishing and advise and support
affiliates of TU Darmstadt comprehensively regarding open access.
Scientists at TU Darmstadt shall be put in the position to exercise their
vested right to free publishing, unrestricted by obsolete subscription and
reputation-based models. Thus, their publications will receive maximum
exposure and excellent conditions for reception based on strict scientific
quality requirements and the respective current state of technology. By
doing so, the Executive Board also supports a higher visibility of research
results and a stronger integration of its scientists and researchers on a
national and international level. According to the respective general
conditions and characteristics of various fields of research, the Executive
Board will create sustainable, customised and ongoing measures for
implementing open access and develop tailored programmes to support
and advise affiliates of TU Darmstadt.
The present policy is evaluated and modified regularly based on the latest
developments regarding open access and open science.

3 https://www.intern.tu-

darmstadt.de/media/daa_responsives_design/03_forschung_medien/forschungsfoe
rderung_2/gute_wiss_praxis/Leitlinien_Forschungsdaten_2015.en.pdf

Seite

2/2

