Open Access policy for the Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen

The Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen is obligated to ensure free and unhindered access to the
research results of its scientists for all people within its social responsibility. In this way, the university
intends to ensure that public funds used for education and science have the greatest possible benefits
for science, industry and society, and increase the international visibility of scientific research at the
university. Therefore, the university supports Open Access publishing in line with numerous national
and international research institutions and scientific organizations.
Open Access refers to different publication models and activities which have the objective of making
scientific findings accessible free of charge to users worldwide. Unrestricted access to scientific
information is the prerequisite for outstanding research achievements and the most effective use of
research findings. Open Access also increases the visibility and citation frequency of publications and
encourages research collaboration.
The University of Tübingen therefore recommends that its scientists publish their results electronically
and according to Open Access principles. For works already published, secondary publication (Green
Open Access) is recommended. Through its own repository, the University of Tübingen provides its
members with an Open Access infrastructure that meets established standards for long-term access to
publications and the exchange of metadata with national and international servers.
Authors should be aware that they may have the right to a parallel or embargoed Open Access
publication in addition to publication in a commercial journal.
The University of Tübingen encourages its members to actively participate in the evaluation of Open
Access publications and establish Open Access journals which meet the standards of scientific quality
assurance through peer review procedures. It also advocates the recognition of Open Access
publications in the assessment of scientific achievements.
The promotion of Open Access concerns financial and legal policy. The University of Tübingen is
committed to developing the existing legal and financial framework to create the conditions for free
access to scientific knowledge.
From 2013 onwards the University of Tübingen pledges financial support to the furthest possible
extent for publication in recognized Open Access bodies (Gold Open Access) to promote the
transition from subscription funded publications to Open Access.
This policy was endorsed by the Senate of the Eberhard Karls University of Tübingen on February 21,
2013.

