Open Access Resolution
The TUD Dresden University of Technology, together with the Saxon State Library - State
and University Library SLUB, supports the global call for open access (OA) to scientific
publications , documented in the "Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the
Sciences and Humanities"(see also https://open-access.network/en/home). Open Access
follows the principle of equal participation for all people in scientific advancement. OA
publications have been proven to achieve a particularly high degree of visibility and outreach
and thus are beneficial to all publishing scientists. In order to continue the transformation
process to OA publishing demanded by the German Science and Humanities Council [1], in
2012 the rectorate and the senate of the TU Dresden have already passed the following
following Open Access resolution, which is also anchored in the publication guidelines of
the TU Dresden:
•

•

•

Scientists of the university are expected to publish their original scientific publications
in peer-reviewed, preferably international Open Access (OA) formats under an open
license (e.g. Creative Commons). To finance OA article processing and publication
fees, the TU Dresden operates a central publication fund together with the SLUB,
where corresponding authors of the TUD can apply for funding.
All scientists of TU Dresden are strongly requested to archive all scientific
publications on the document and publication server Qucosa or research data on a
suitable repository (e.g. OpARA), as far as the rights of use of publishers are not in
conflict. Nowadays, many publishers allow such self-archiving, even if the publication
has already been published in a journal or by a publisher that requires a license (Green
OA). The SLUB advises before concluding publishing agreements in order to retain
the corresponding exploitation rights.
OA representatives appointed ex officio are the Vice-Rector of TU Dresden as well as
the Director General of the SLUB.

[1] German Science and Humanities Council(2022): Recommendations for transforming
academic publishing to open access (in German only), Köln. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.57674/fyrc-vb61

