Fraunhofer Open Access Strategy 2020
October 2015

Outstanding research and the realization of innovations in industry and everyday life are the foundation of the
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft’s work. Producing research of consistently excellent quality is therefore firmly anchored
in the organization’s guiding principles and an essential requirement for all Fraunhofer Institutes. In order to
promote innovation, it is required that research findings are shared as directly as possible and with a minimum
of delay. When publishing the results of its research, Fraunhofer therefore unreservedly pursues the principle of
open access.
Open access implies granting free and long-term access to scientific findings and scientific literature. A distinction is made between the gold road to open access, where research papers are first published in recognized,
peer-reviewed open access journals, and the green road to open access, where papers are archived free of
charge in an institutional or specialized repository either at the same time as or subsequently to their initial
publication in one of the traditional media. The common feature of both roads to open access is that texts and
objects can be freely accessed in digital format.
In line with the wider concept of open science, Fraunhofer’s Open Access Strategy pursues and promotes the
goal of making science and its results more easily accessible to a greater number of people. While doing so, strict
attention is paid to respecting the researchers’ scientific and legal interests, protecting personal data, and
complying with obligations toward third parties, such as customers and collaborating partners.

Objectives
 Social responsibility – Science as public property
As a publicly funded organization, Fraunhofer has a
duty to facilitate the free and immediate access to
its research findings (including the data on which
these findings are based), and in this way inform the
general public about the results of its research activities. For this reason, wherever possible, all Fraunhofer research papers shall be published via the gold or
green road of open access.

follow-up research projects. Another advantage of
open access publishing is that it permits the use of
innovative methods of analysis or evaluation. The
sharing of scientific knowledge through cross-linked,
digital resources enables the development of new
research approaches and innovations, and promotes faster and more immediate communication and
exchange of experience within the scientific community.

 Creating value through knowledge transfer
The publication of research papers is an important
element in Fraunhofer’s strategy for transferring
knowledge and technology to society at large and
to potential customers and collaborating partners.
The best possible access must be provided to the
results of research performed at Fraunhofer, so
that they are immediately available for re-use in

 Reproducible results
Reproducibility is one of the fundamental principles
of scientific practice, because it ensures that experimental results can be duplicated and verified. Open
access to published papers promotes transparency in
research and enables research results to be verified
more quickly and easily, especially if the underlying
data is also made available at the same time.

 Greater efficiency
Open access publishing enables information to be
spread more promptly and efficiently to all interested parties in the research market. By providing
timely access to scientific papers, new findings can
be disseminated more rapidly, leading to shorter
innovation cycles. Another advantage of Fraunhofer’s open access strategy is that the publication
of scientific work and research findings on an open
platform enables the organization’s industrial and
business partners to easily identify the most suitable
partners for their future research projects.
 Optimized costs
As part of our open access activities, we are in the
process of developing cost-transparent models in
collaboration with the relevant scientific publishing
houses.
 Political framework
Fraunhofer’s strategy is aligned with the open access
policies promulgated by the EU and by the German
national and regional governments, and complies
with the recommendations of the German and European research funding agencies. On a national and
European level, open access publishing is seen as a
topic of public interest, and hence the Fraunhofer
Open Access Strategy will help to bring about a
cultural change in the scientific practice and conduct
of the scientific community.

Planed Activities
 Fraunhofer’s open access repository (»FraunhoferePrints«) will be amended by an open research data
repository (»Fraunhofer-Fordatis«), and the two
resources will be linked in a single, integrated infrastructure.
 To operate such resources successfully, standards
must be defined and consistently applied. Our researchers are therefore given wide-ranging support
and advice on all aspects of open access publishing,
by all affected and responsible parties in the institutes.
The support provided at institute level includes to inform and to give advice to all stakeholders about the
options available for open access publishing, with
the aim of increasing the number of open access
publications and of open access research data sets.
 Suitable measures are being set up to promote the
transition to gold open access, e.g. installing a publication fund. An integrated structure for managing
license-fees and publication costs is being established to assure a high level of cost transparency.
 Fraunhofer is also active on the national and international stage as a proponent and activist of open
access.

General conditions
The goal for 2020 is to ensure that at least one half of
all scientific papers issued in a year are published open
access, with at least one third of these via the gold
road where papers are first published in an open access
journal. Targeted measures are also being implemented to encourage the simultaneous publication of
underlying and related research data on an open
access platform, wherever possible.

Fraunhofer’s Open Access Strategy does not impose
any restrictions on individual researchers to their scientific freedom.
The interests of researchers, collaborators and customers
are entirely respected. Compliance with data protection
and copyright laws is ensured as a matter of course, as
are the rules of good scientific practice.
Open access in no way compromises the high quality of
research papers published by Fraunhofer scientists, and
takes into account the differences between publishing
practices in different areas of research.

Visit http://www.openaccess.fraunhofer.de for more information on the Fraunhofer open access strategy.

