Open Access Strategy of
Forschungszentrum Jülich
Entry into force: 1 January 2023
Forschungszentrum Jülich welcomes and supports the transition of scientific publishing to
open access, including within the framework of national and international initiatives.

1. Diamond open access
a) Forschungszentrum Jülich offers the option of publishing journal articles and monographs
through its publishing house free of charge with the diamond open access model.
b) The publication of the scientific findings of Forschungszentrum Jülich using the diamond
open access model is explicitly encouraged. Forschungszentrum Jülich can contribute within
the scope of the library budget to funding publisher-independent publication options in line
with the principle of diamond open access.

2. Gold open access
a) Article processing charges (APCs) for gold open access journals are covered up to the
amount of € 3,000 by the publication fund managed by the Central Library (ZB) when the
corresponding author is from Forschungszentrum Jülich. *1
b) APCs for gold open access monographs are covered up to the amount of € 5,000 by the
publication fund managed by ZB when the corresponding author or editor is from
Forschungszentrum Jülich. If several authors or editors from different institutions are
involved, the costs should ideally be shared between the various institutions.

3. Green open access
a) ZB completes – as far as possible – the data sets in JuSER by adding the publishers’
versions of publications.
b) The authors or the organizational units send the “Final Draft Post Referee” version of
publications to ZB. ZB clarifies secondary-use copyright issues and uploads the publications
to Forschungszentrum Jülich’s repository accordingly (cf. Directive No. 2/2020 “Publications
by Forschungszentrum Jülich GmbH”).

4. Subscription journals
a) Through active collection management of subscription journals, ZB ensures that the
increasing financial requirements of the publication fund are covered where possible by
procurement resources that become available due to subscription cancellations.
b) Hybrid open access APCs are only covered by the publication fund when the publication
appears in a journal that is part of a transformative agreement concluded by ZB. In the JuLib

eXtended information portal, ZB maintains a list of journals for which open access fees are
covered (https://go.fzj.de/OAjournals).
c) Other APCs for subscription journals are not covered by the publication fund.

5. Limiting costs
Forschungszentrum Jülich strives for an average expenditure of no more than € 2,000 per
journal publication. ZB will monitor the development of costs and make adjustments if
required.
*1 The following applies to publications to be paid for by Forschungszentrum Jülich:
•

•
•

The corresponding author must be from Forschungszentrum Jülich. If there are several
corresponding authors, the costs should ideally be shared between the institutions
involved. If this is not possible or can only be achieved with great difficulty,
Forschungszentrum Jülich will bear the full costs.
If the corresponding author has several affiliations, Forschungszentrum Jülich must be
listed as the first affiliation.
The email address provided must be a Forschungszentrum Jülich email address.

Last Modified: 13.02.2023

