Goethe University’s Open Access Policy
Drawing on its great disciplinary diversity, Goethe University excels as a research and
educational institution that recognizes civic values and embraces its social responsibility. The
specific culture of an academic discipline strongly affects the publication forms as well as
common ways of publishing within it. Goethe University honors the differences between
academic disciplines when it comes to publishing as an expression of scientific freedom. Acting
upon its social responsibility, Goethe University endorses open access to scientific publications.
Thus, Goethe University strives to maximize the number of publications of its researchers which
are openly available. Due to being openly accessible, scientific publications distributed according
to the principles of open access are bound to boost the visibility of their authors and highlight
the accomplishments of Goethe University as a whole.
Goethe University encourages its researchers to publish their work according to open access
principles. Both gold and green open access variants are considered equally suitable. “Gold” open
access principles apply when a scholarly manuscript – most commonly, a scientific article – is
published in a peer-reviewed open access journal. “Green” open access principles apply when
researchers self-archive their publications using institutional or subject repositories in order to
ensure free access to their scientific discoveries. In regard to green open access, researchers at
Goethe University are advised to enact their rights as authors to self-archive their works, thereby
making an important contribution to the advancement of society as a whole.
Goethe University supports open access publishing among its researchers through various
means, which include the following:
 The university library supports gold open access publishing through its open access
publication fund, which provides financial aid for authors choosing to distribute their work in
open access journals.
 The university library runs the “Publication Server of Goethe University Frankfurt am Main”,
an institutional repository intended to promote green open access publishing. Researchers can
both self-archive their publications as well as publish documents within this archive. As the
publication server relies on standardized interfaces, documents stored there can be retrieved
easily and their long-term availability is ensured.
 The university library’s “Plattform für Open Access Journals” is an open access hosting service
for academic journal publishers featuring professional web design and facilitating a
sophisticated editorial workflow.
 The university library and its Open Access Officer offer extensive consulting services regarding
all aspects of open access publishing.

