The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft‘s
Open Access Policy

July 2008

Preamble
Excellence in research and the transfer of innovations to industrial and social applications constitute the fundamental
values of the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft. Indeed, the organization‘s guiding principles state explicitly that all Fraunhofer
Institutes are expected to produce research work of an excellent quality.
It is an essential requirement that scientific data and research findings should be made openly and immediately
available, with the obvious exception of confidential information supplied by customers of the Fraunhofer Institutes
for the purposes of a specific project. This applies as much to basic research as to applied research. Innovation is
impossible unless researchers are able to share new knowledge as soon as it has been established. In its capacity as a
publicly funded research organization, the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft has a duty to inform the general public about its
research activities. At the same time, industrial partners have a need for information that will allow them to find the
appropriate partners for their projects. Consequently, the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft pursues a publishing policy based
on unrestricted access to information, as defined in the 2003 Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the
Sciences and Humanities.

Objectives
To provide open access to scientific data, the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft makes every effort to ensure that full-text versions of all papers and articles written by its employees are made freely available in the international digital media.
„Full-text“ in this context applies to any type of material authorized for publication by the relevant Fraunhofer Institute, including poster sessions and presentations, insofar as they provide documentation of substantial research results.
The aim is to allow these publications to be read, searched, printed, distributed or utilized in any other conceivable
legitimate manner without any financial, technical or legal restrictions. This does not affect the author‘s legal right to
be identified as the copyright holder of such works. The authors are still expected to comply with generally accepted
standards concerning the quality of scientific research and the rules on safeguarding good scientific practice.

Implementation
The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft is committed to providing the necessary financial, organizational and non-material support that will allow the concept of open access to be implemented under optimum conditions.
The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft wholeheartedly supports the idea of publishing scientific papers in recognized, peerreviewed, open-access journals or on other open-access platforms. If papers are published in media that are not
readily accessible to the general public, or that require a subscription or other form of payment, copies shall be made
available through the organization‘s own public repository, Fraunhofer-ePrints. In this case, if so required by the publishing house, an embargo of up to one year may be respected. To ensure the widest possible dissemination of our
research findings, publications issued exclusively as Fraunhofer-ePrints may be freely copied, distributed or otherwise
made available to the public.
Employees are encouraged to choose the best possible mode of publication for their research findings, in terms of
readership. They are expressly required to demand that publishing houses grant them the right to further use of their
own works.
Management staff and project leaders are urged to take a proactive stance in encouraging and enabling the employees in their charge to make use of open-access publishing – both in open access journals and through reprints of
previously issued articles.
The Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft‘s authors can obtain a full range of assistance for their publishing activities from the
Institutes‘ specialized information managers, who are in turn supported by the central service departments. The
Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft‘s full-text articles are stored on the Fraunhofer-ePrints server. This repository has been built
up on the basis of international standards, to ensure long-term, worldwide access to the documents.

In the interests of optimizing the visibility of its research findings, the Fraunhofer-Gesellschaft aims to establish close links
with other German and international repositories.
In cooperation with other representatives of the German research community, the Fraunhofer- Gesellschaft is committed to
lobbying for official recognition of open-access publishing on a national and European scale, and for the drafting of appropriate legislation.

