Open Access Policy at Leibniz University
Hannover
Leibniz University Hannover advocates and supports the demand for open access to scientific
knowledge as laid down in the "Berlin Declaration" of October 2003. In the spirit of this
declaration, the following guideline is adopted by the Presidium and Senate:

PREAMBLE
Leibniz University Hannover advocates and supports the demand for open access to scientific
knowledge as laid down in the "Berlin Declaration" of October 2003. In this way, Leibniz
University Hannover is helping to ensure that research results are available for the greatest
possible benefit to science, industry and society. Open Access increases the visibility of
scientific publications and makes it easier to check the quality of publications. With its Open
Access policy, Leibniz University Hannover follows the maxim of its namesake Gottfried
Wilhelm Leibniz: "Theoria Cum Praxi - All action should be directed towards the common
good."
The Open Access policy supplements the policy on good scientific practice, the publication
policy and the policy on research data management in their respective applicable versions.
"Berlin Declaration" on Open Access to Scientific Knowledge
to the declaration
Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice published by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation)
to the guidelines
Publication Guidelines of Leibniz University Hannover
to the guidelines
Guidelines for handling research data at Leibniz University Hannover
to the guidelines

PRINCIPLES
1. Leibniz University Hannover encourages its members to publish their scientific
publications Open Access. Leibniz University Hannover recommends first publication
as an Open Access publication under a free licence (preferably CC BY; text only
available in German). This applies not only to journal articles, but also to other
publication types such as monographs or proceedings.
2. Leibniz University Hannover encourages its members to retain the right to further use
of their works when concluding publishing agreements and to transfer only simple
rights of use.
3. Pure Open Access journals are to be preferred to those which publish only a part of the
articles freely accessible, provided that the quality is guaranteed. In the case of
publications, attention should be paid to the highest level of excellence.or authors
should be supported in their publishing activities and the visibility and long-term

availability of their research publications should be improved.
4. Leibniz University Hannover calls on university members to exercise their secondary
publication rights and to additionally publish copies of their publications in parallel in
the university's open access repository.
5.

Leibniz University Hannover calls on its members to actively participate in the
transformation of the publication system towards Open Access. It expects all
university members to evaluate their own activities in the context of reviewing, editing
or publishing publications accordingly. It asks its members to use their own position to
advocate for the Open Access transformation in publishing houses and professional
societies. Commitment to non-commercial offerings is particularly advocated.

Appeal for the use of open licences in science (only available im German)
to the appeal

SUPPORT FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION
In its role as a university library, TIB supports the members of Leibniz University Hannover
in Open Access publishing. Together with the university, it is committed to the transformation
of scientific publishing to Open Access. University members are supported by an advisory
service, an institutional full-text repository, a publication fund and by OA agreements with
publishers. An Open Access platform is available for the publication of journals and
proceedings.
Further information on the subject of Open Access is provided on the TIB website
"Publishing and Archiving".
The TIB offers information and advice on the subject of Open Access
to the website
Institutional Repository of Leibniz Universität Hannover
to the website

MONITORING
Leibniz University Hannover is introducing Open Access monitoring to support a transparent,
open and sustainable redesign of the scientific publication system.
Leibniz University aims to increase the share of OA publications in its total publications. It
would like to quantify its efforts and thereby make them verifiable. The OA share of Leibniz
University Hannover's publication volume is recorded using the research information system.
Leibniz University Hannover also aims to increase the transparency of its decentralised
publication costs.

