Open Science Policy within the Max Weber
Foundation
Adopted by the Board of Trustees on November 22, 2024

Preamble

The Max Weber Foundation - German Humanities Institutes Abroad (Max Weber Stiftung –
Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland (MWS)) is a publicly funded organization
that aims to inform both the scientific community and the general public about its research
activities. MWS advocates for Open Science which shares all components of the research process in
an accessible, transparent, and reusable way. The foundation sees its commitment to Open Science
as a means to address inequalities in the global distribution of scientific resources. Thanks to the
presence of MWS member institutes across the world the foundation is particularly sensitive to and
aware of this concern.
This policy expresses our self-understanding and is addressed to all researchers within the
foundation. It is based on an ongoing, iterative discussion process. The policy is a work in process
and, therefore, an offer for the joint development and implementation of the fundamental
principles and practices of Open Science within the MWS.

Relationship to other documents and guidelines of the
MWS

This Open Science Policy is derived from the MWS's agreements with the Federal Ministry of
Education and Research (BMBF) as well as the MWS's sustainability and “Strategy 2030” concept
documents. 1 It also builds on the efforts of national and international scientific organizations such
as the German Research Foundation (DFG), 2 the Council for Information Infrastructure (RfII), 3 the
1 Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2023). Nachhaltigkeitskonzept der Max

Weber Stiftung. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10220844; the MWS strategy until 2030:
https://www.maxweberstiftung.de/fileadmin/user_upload/MWS_Strategie2030.pdf (both documents are only available
in German).
2 Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft. (2022). Open Science als Teil der Wissenschaftskultur. Positionierung der Deutschen
Forschungsgemeinschaft. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7193838.
3 RfII. (2022). Datenpolitik, Open Science und Dateninfrastrukturen: Aktuelle Entwicklungen im europäischen Raum.
Bericht und Empfehlungen. https://rfii.de/?p=7743. urn:nbn:de:101:1-2021090875.

European Research Council (ERC), 4 and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) 5 to promote Open Science. This policy integrates two previous MWS papers
(Open Access Policy and Guidelines for Handling Research Data) 6 into a broader context and
corresponds directly with the MWS Guidelines for Safeguarding Good Research Practice. 7

Definition of Open Science

The term “Open Science” is widely used and encompasses the use of digital tools for open access,
transparency, reusability, and reproducibility of scientific research. The goals of Open Science
include, among others, promoting equal, rapid, and sustainable access to knowledge, increasing the
visibility and impact of research results, the conservation of resources, promoting trust in science,
and enabling public participation in research processes. Legal, ethical/moral, and economic
considerations can limit the openness of science just as much as disciplinary-specific
characteristics. In response to this potential conflict of goals, the MWS adheres to the principle “as
open as possible, as closed as necessary.”

Intentions and fields of action for Open Science within the
MWS

The MWS and its researchers are committed to the principles of Open Science and actively promote
the introduction and use of Open Science practices. This is facilitated through the foundation's
existing infrastructure, consulting services in digital publishing, libraries, and research data
management, as well as the aggregation of expertise from the institutes in working groups such as
the Digital Humanities working group (AK DH). Out of these activities the MWS’s institutes are able
to identify concrete action areas and to initiate an inventory of their existing Open Science
practices. This will be promoted individually and collectively within the foundation over the years
2025-2028.

Dimensions of Open Science within the MWS

The dimensions of Open Science within the MWS include, among others, the open provision of and
free access to publications, data, metadata, and software under standardized open licenses (e.g.,
Creative Commons licences). The MWS supports its researchers in granting unrestricted and free
access to their scientific output for all people in all locations. It also encourages the testing of open
procedures, such as Open Peer Review.

Another field of action is the active promotion of open and inclusive science communication. In line
with its values, the MWS focuses on the use of open, non-commercial platforms. The MWS provides
its researchers with an open international infrastructure for science communication through
4 https://erc.europa.eu/about-erc/thematic-working-groups/working-group-open-access .
5 UNESCO. (2021). UNESCO Recommendation on Open Science. UNESDOC Digital Library.

https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000379949.
6 Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2024). Open Access Policy within the
Max Weber Foundation. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14282081; Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche
Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2023). Guidelines for the Handling of Research Data within the Max
Weber Foundation. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10225705.
7 Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2023). MWS Guidelines for Safeguarding
Good Research Practice. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10228420.

2

de.hypotheses, 8 the blog portal for the humanities. This also enables the networking and transfer of
knowledge to the public.

The MWS further supports research processes and instruments that enable dialogue with society
through citizen science elements. It promotes the use and creation of open educational resources
(OER).

In the spirit of a sustainable cultural transformation in the humanities and social sciences, the MWS
aims to create and anchor a consciousness for Open Science among its researchers, inter alia
through information and training events. In line with the humanities and social sciences orientation
of the foundation, a critical perspective on these processes is also incorporated. The institutes
support the engagement of their researchers to participate in national and international forums
and debates on Open Science.

The MWS promotes the recognition of different career paths in the humanities, including the
recognition of activities in the field of research infrastructure, which are of fundamental importance
for Open Science.

As a publicly funded organization with locations distributed worldwide, the MWS sees it as its
special responsibility to promote multilingualism and the dissemination of scientific knowledge,
inter alia through translations. Free access to knowledge, debates, and international exchange in
the field of Open Science are all goals to further promote inclusion, diversity, and global justice.

Scope of application

This policy applies to the entire foundation and all researchers within the MWS.

Validity

This policy was adopted by the MWS Board of Trustees on November 22, 2024 in Berlin. It will be
reviewed and, if necessary, updated at least every four years by the AK DH in light of new
developments in the field of Open Science.

Current version of the policy
Version

Publication

Comments/changes

1.0

28.01.2025

First publication, adopted by the Board of Trustees
on November 22, 2024.
Translation of the original text was done with the
help of AI (https://docs.hpc.gwdg.de/services/chatai/models/index.html#llama-31-8b-instruct) plus
human manual correction and editing.

8 https://de.hypotheses.org/ .

3

License
This policy is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International (CC BY 4.0)
license.

Citation

Max Weber Stiftung - Deutsche Geisteswissenschaftliche Institute im Ausland. (2024). Open Science
Policy within the Max Weber Foundation. Zenodo. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.14283651.

4

